Amphibious;3;False;No move penalty in water terrains.;Amphibious models may cross bogs, swamps, lakes, and any kind of water terrain with no movement penalty.Shallow water is treated simply as rough terrain in the basic rules - this is expanded upon in Song of Wind and Water.;
Animal;-3;False;No XP gain. Cannot use objects. Automatically rout if only animals are left.;Animal models do not receive experience points in campaigns. Animals cannot use magic items. Animals automatically rout when the last non-animal model in their warband is killed.;
Artificial;3;False;Immune to Poison, Terror, and Gruesome Deaths.;Artificial models include non-living creatures such as elementals, automatons, golems, or robots. They are immune to poison and do not suffer gruesome kills (treat a Gruesome kill as a normal kill). They do not make Morale rolls for Gruesome Kills or Terror. They make normal Morale rolls for the loss of a Leader or if the warband is reduced to 50% – their “programming” kicks in and tells them that in some cases it is better to run away and live to fight another day.;
Assassin;15;X;Do not need to double the result to kill enemy. Don't work on Undead or Artificial.;An Assassin is specially trained to find weak spots in an opponent’s defenses. When Assassins beat an opponent in combat (melee and ranged) they kill him, with no need for doubling the target’s score. Assassins score gruesome kills normally (i.e., they need to triple the opponent’s score to inflict a gruesome kill). The Assassin rule works only against living creatures. It does not work against Artificial or Undead targets. The Assassin rule applies both to ranged and melee combat. Assassins are Personalities.;
Big;3;False;+1 in Melee vs shorter enemies. Enemies have +1 on Ranged attacks.;Big creatures (ogres, trolls, minotaurs, and the like) have +1 in melee versus smaller folk, but are targeted at +1 by ranged attacks. See Huge and Gargantuan for even bigger models. The Big rule represents not only size but also the increased physical strength which usually comes with large mass. To represent a large but weak fighter, give him Big but also lower his Combat score by 1. The end result is a figure which is easier to hit with missiles and isn’t particularly strong in melee.;
Cleric;15;X;Lethal vs Undead. Can heal adjacent allies.;All ranged or melee attacks from a Cleric are Lethal against any Undead model (i.e., they kill the model without having to double its Combat score). Clerics can perform faith healing by laying their hands on friendly models and invoking their deities. To do so, a Cleric must be adjacent to the model to be healed and spend one action to use the healing power. By rolling one or more successes on his Quality roll, a Cleric heals that many points of Quality loss (for example, to a model who has lost Quality due to the effects of Poison, or a model with the Tough special rule who has been wounded). Two successes may also be used to make a fallen model stand up. If the Cleric ever rolls three failures during one of these Quality rolls, though, his deity is displeased with him. The Cleric loses healing and anti-Undead powers for the remainder of the game. In a campaign, the Cleric’s powers return at the beginning of the next game. The Cleric is assumed to have used his off time for atonement or special rites/prayers to regain his faith.;
Clinging;3;False;Can walk on vertical surfaces.;Models with the Clinging special rule can walk on Models with the Clinging special rule can walk on walls, ceilings and trees. Typical examples include giant lizards, slugs, centipedes and spiders, but the rule may also be used to represent ninjas with climbing claws. Models with Clinging fall down when they are knocked down in combat, but they do not take damage from falls. They are assumed to have means to stop the fall as long as they remain in contact with the wall -- they would take damage if they were dropped by a giant eagle onto a rock! A model on a wall counts as in higher elevation when attacking a creature on the ground.;
Combat Master;10;X;Can make one melee attack by action.;A model with the Combat Master ability can make one melee attack per action. A Combat Master who is adjacent to an enemy may roll three activations and make three attacks, or a Power Blow followed by a normal attack. If the model is adjacent to more than one figure, attacks can be divided as the player sees fit. For example, a model adjacent to two enemies could roll three actions and perform a Power Blow on one foe and a regular attack on another, or he could roll two attacks on one foe and one on the other. Combat Masters are Personalities. A Combat Master with the Assassin or Lethal rule may use it only on one of his attacks (player’s choice, but must be declared before rolling the combat die). A Savage Combat Master scores Gruesome Kills on all his kill results. A Combat Master with Poison rolls for the effects of Poison in every attack he performs. A Combat Master enjoying an Ambush bonus would have the bonus only on his first attack. A Combat Master performing a Free Hack gets only one Free Hack as per normal rules. A Combat Master enjoys the +1 from Dashing only on his first attack. All other melee modifiers (e.g., Mounted, defending an obstacle, higher elevation) apply on all attacks performed by a Combat Master.;
Danger Sense;3;False;Enemies can't benefit from Ambush bonus.;The model has a special sixth sense warning him of dangers and sneak attacks a split second before they happen. Models attacking a target with Danger Sense never enjoy any Ambush bonus.;
Dashing;3;False;+1 in Combat on the same turn he comes in contact with enemy.;The model receives +1 to his Combat score (in hand-to-hand combat only) if he attacks in the same turn he comes in contact with an enemy. On any other attack, his Combat score is unaffected.;
Desert Walk;3;False;No move penalty in desert terrains.;A model with Desert-walk is not restricted in movement by desert terrain, including dunes.;
Entangle;15;False;Can cast Transfix spells.;The Entangle special rule represents the ability to shoot spiderwebs or any other attack that could glue an opponent on the spot or hinder his movement. Entangle works just like the ability to cast Transfix spells (so range is Short if one action is used, Medium if two are used, and Long if three are used). The main difference is that the entangle is not automatically broken if the entangler is killed. Entangle does not necessarily represent a magical attack, it doesn’t count as a spell and need NOT be declared at activation as with spells. Entangled models count as Transfixed for outnumbering purposes.;
Fearless;3;False;Don't test Morale on Gruesome Deaths & Terror.;Fearless models are immune to the effect of Gruesome Deaths and Terror. They make Morale rolls normally for the loss of a Leader or when their warband loses more than 50% of its members.;
Flying;10;False;Can move freely above obstacle & other models. Free Disengage vs non flying creatures.;Flying models can freely move above obstacles and non-flying enemy models. They have Free Disengage against non flying models. Flying models always land at the end of their move. Combat between flying and ground models is conducted as normal, and the Flying model is deemed to have a higher elevation bonus ONLY if on such terrain. A flying model takes no special damage when he falls during combat, even when the combat is between two aerial combatants – the models are assumed to have means to stop the fall. Flying models may always move through friendly and enemy models unless indoors, in situations such as rooms with low ceiling or dungeon corridors, without enough space for them to swoop over ground models.;
Forester;3;False;No move penalty in forest terrains.;A Forester is trained to move across wooded areas. Foresters suffer no movement reduction when crossing woods of any kind.;
Free Disengage;3;False;Can leave combat without receiving a Free Hack.;A model may have Free Disengage either because it is written on his profile, or because another special rule or combat situation (e.g., Flying, Mounted) confers him this advantage. A model with Free Disengage doesn’t receive a Free Hack when leaving a melee combat engagement. Note that a model must still stop his movement when contacting an enemy’s base – but can then use additional actions, if he has any, to move away with no ill effect.;
Gargantuan;3;False;+1 in Melee vs shorter enemies. Enemies have +1 on Ranged attacks.;Gargantuan models are even bigger than Huge, and get +1 in melee against all smaller opponents. Like Huge and Big, they are targeted at +1 by ranged attacks.;
Good shot;3;False;+1 on Ranges attacks.;A model with Good Shot has +1 on all ranged attacks.;
Greedy;-2;False;Must take a Quality roll every time he kills an enemy. If failed, must spend one action to rob/eat the body.;A Greedy model must make a Quality test every time he kills a foe in melee. If the test fails, the model will remain adjacent to the fallen foe and start to rob the body (or feed on it, skin it, as appropriate). The model will have to spend one action to snap out of Greed on its next activation.;
Gregarious;3;False;+1 on Quality for group moves.;Gregarious models have +1 on their Quality rolls when attempting group moves. Gregarious models also enjoy the +1 to activation given by a Leader.;
Heavy Armor;3;False;If beaten by one point, result counts as equality. Cannot Stealth and have malus to climb.;This rule represents protection offered by a complete suit of armor or a dragon’s scales. Anytime the model is beaten in Combat by one point, the model does not Recoil or Fall — the armor turns the opponent’s blow and the Combat round is a draw. A model wearing Heavy Armor may not benefit from the Stealth rule and has -2 on climbing rolls.;
Hero;15;X;Receive one automatic success on Quality rolls. Can re-roll one dice per game.;Heroes always receive one automatic success, regardless of their Quality. So, for example, if you activate a Hero on two dice, you roll only one and assume that the other die rolled a 6. In addition, once per game, a Hero model can re-roll one die roll, be it a Combat or Quality roll. The result of the second die roll is final, even if it is worse than the previous one.;
Huge;5;False;+1 in Melee vs shorter enemies. Enemies have +1 on Ranged attacks.;Huge creatures (dragons and the like) have +1 in melee versus smaller models (this includes models with the Big special rule!) and are targeted at +1 by ranged attacks. In some cases, Huge models may not be able to claim protection from terrain because of their sheer size. See the Gargantuan rule for details.;
Leader;15;X;All allies within Long and line of sight have +1 on Quality. All allies test Morale if Leader dies. Can order group moves.;Leaders influence models’ Quality and Morale. Any friendly model within Long distance from a Leader has its Quality rolls (including Activation and Morale rolls) increased by one. When a Leader dies, though, all friendly models must make a Morale roll. The effects of multiple Leaders are not cumulative — so if a model lies in the range of two Leaders, its Quality is adjusted by 1, not 2. A Leader’s bonus does not apply to himself. The Leader’s bonus does not count if the Leader is lying on the ground or if the model cannot see the Leader (the model cannot trace a line of sight to the Leader due to interposing terrain). Enemy models do not obstruct line of sight from a model to his Leader (thus you count your bonus even if you can’t see your Leader because he is surrounded by enemies). Leaders may also attempt group activations -- rolling to activate a group of 2 to 5 models with a single die roll. This is further described in the Group Moves section.;
Legendary Shot;15;X;Can make a ranged attack by action.;This special rule can be taken only by a Personality with the Shooter ability. The model can perform one ranged attack per action, not just one per turn like normal characters. He can mix Aimed Shots and regular ranged attacks as he sees fit. Use normal targeting restrictions. The target of any ranged attack is decided after seeing the results of the previous attacks. In other words, a Legendary shot with three actions may fire at one enemy, kill him, and then perform his additional attacks against other available targets. If the character with Legendary Shot takes part in a concentrated shooting, that uses only one of his at tacks, so if he has more actions available, he can perform additional ranged attacks.;
Lethal;3;False;Do not need to double the result to kill a specific type of enemy.;Lethal models kill an opponent of a certain type, race or category just by beating him in Combat (no need to double his score). The creature’s profile will specify who he is Lethal against. For example, a Witch Hunter is trained to fight humanoid witches and warlocks. In game terms, he is Lethal against any normal-sized model with the Magic-User rule (the witch hunter will NOT be lethal against an ancient, magic using dragon). A Giant Killer is lethal against any member of the Giant race, and so on. The Lethal effect applies to both ranged combat and melee. A character may have a single instance of the Lethal rule. In other words, a character may NOT take Lethal twice, against more than one type of opponent -- take the Assassin special rule instead. And no, you may not design a model who is Lethal vs Lethal models!;
Long Move;10;False;Use the Long distance when moves.;Models with the Long Move rule use the Long measuring stick when moving. Note that it is possible to have a Slow character with Long move – an example would be a giant with very long legs but slow reflexes. He doesn't react fast but when he moves, he can outrun a man with just one stride.;
Magic-User;15;X;Can cast spells for attack or to Transfix.;Magic-Users can cast spells as ranged attacks or to transfix opponents. See the Magic section for details.;
Mounted;6;False;+1 on Combat in melee against not mounted and of equal size or shorter. Have Free Disengage against non mounted and non flying models. Can transport other models;Mounted models ride some sort of steed -- be it a horse, a giant turtle, a bear or other riding creature. Mounted figures have +1 on their Combat score in melee versus any non-Mounted figure their size or smaller. This means that the Mounted bonus does not work against opponents who are one or more sized bigger (example: normal Mounted creature vs Big or Huge creature). Mounted figures have the Free Disengage rule against all non-Mounted, non-Flying enemies. To keep things simple, rider and mount are treated as a single figure for purposes of the game. You don’t need a separate model for the mount without its rider: it is assumed to run away or be out of action when the rider is killed. Mounted models may “pick up” and transport friendly models of the same size of their riders or smaller. It takes one action for a Mounted model who is adjacent to a foot figure (of the same size or smaller) to pick up a friend. The carried figure does not need to be activated to be carried - a fast cavalryman could pick up a panicking child and bring him to safety, for example. This also applies to a Transfixed model. Only one creature may be carried. A carried figure may later dismount. It takes one action on the part of the carried figure to dismount: place the carried figure anywhere adjacent to the mount’s base when he does so. The movement of Mounted models is reduced for rough terrain as normal for any figure.;
Poison;3;False;When hits, roll a die: on 5 or 6, enemy has +1 on Quality (dies if Quality reaches 7).;Models with the Poison special ability have a venomous natural attack or use poisoned weapons. This includes their ranged weapons, if any. Roll a die every time a poison attack hits: on a 5 or 6, the target’s Quality number goes up by 1, and if it ever reaches 7, the model dies.;
Rabble;-5;False;Model is automatically killed if beaten in Combat.;A model with the Rabble rule is automatically killed if beaten in combat. In other words, all attacks are Lethal against Rabble creatures. If the attack doubles the Rabble creature's Combat score, treat it as a Gruesome Kill. Rabble models may not be assigned a Quality score better than 4.;
Savage;3;False;Inflicts Gruesome Deaths on every kills in melee.;A Savage model inflicts a gruesome kill just by doubling the opponent’s score in melee (i.e. they don’t need to treble it -- every kill counts as gruesome). All friends of the savagely-killed model in LOS and within 1 x Medium range must test Morale. Note that the effects of Savage do not apply to ranged attacks.;
Shooter: Long;7;False;Can make range attacks at Long distance.;Shooters can make ranged attacks such as shooting a bow, throwing javelins or breathing fire. The range of the attack is shown in the profile, so there is a Shooter Short, Shooter Medium and a Shooter Long.;
Shooter: Medium;4;False;Can make range attacks at Medium distance.;Shooters can make ranged attacks such as shooting a bow, throwing javelins or breathing fire. The range of the attack is shown in the profile, so there is a Shooter Short, Shooter Medium and a Shooter Long.;
Shooter: Short;2;False;Can make range attacks at Short distance.;Shooters can make ranged attacks such as shooting a bow, throwing javelins or breathing fire. The range of the attack is shown in the profile, so there is a Shooter Short, Shooter Medium and a Shooter Long.;
Short Move;-3;False;Uses the Short distance when moves.;A model with the Short Move rule uses the Short measuring stick when moving. If the model must move through difficult terrain, it takes him two actions to perform a Short move or it may spend one action and move one base.;
Slow;-5;False;Can only move once per turn.;Slow models can only make one movement per turn, regardless of how many activation successes they roll. Note that a model such as a giant or troll may be Slow but be capable of Long movement -- slow reactions, long legs! The only time a Slow model can make two movements in a turn is when it is fleeing due to a failed Morale roll.;
Steadfast;3;False;+1 for Moral rolls.;Steadfast models have +1 on Morale rolls.;
Stealth;3;False;Cannot be targeted by range attacks (except the magic ones) as long as he is in contact with a scenic item.;A model with Stealth can move silently across the battlefield, using available cover to his advantage. As long as the model is adjacent to any scenic feature that counts as cover, the model may not be targeted by any ranged attack, unless the ranged attack is performed with a magic weapon or is a spell. In other words, attacks with magic weapons and spells used as ranged attacks may always target a model with Stealth (this also applies to any attempt to Transfix the target). There is no need for the cover to be between the Stealthy model and potential shooters -- as long as the Stealthy model’s base is in contact with a scenic item, he can’t be targeted by non-magical ranged attacks.;
Swarm;3;False;Must regroup. Enemies have -2 on range attacks.;Swarm bases count as Animals. A Swarm base represents tens or even thousands of creatures -- enough critters to envelop an adult man and suffocate/bite/sting him to death. A complete Swarm is represented by two or more swarm bases. All Swarm bases of the same type must keep adjacent to at least another swarm base during play. If a swarm model is killed and a hole appears in this “formation”, as a free action the player can tighten the formation, bringing all Swarm models in contact again. The tightening must happen in the easiest way, i.e., by moving the MINIMUM number of bases possible and the minimum distance to retain swarm coherency. Swarms may be Transfixed as normal. Swarms are affected at -2 by ranged attacks. Spells used as ranged attacks against Swarms do not suffer the -2 modifier, as the Magic-User is deemed to use an appropriate elemental force, such as a jet of flames or a gust of wind, against the Swarm. When a Swarm base is knocked down, it means that the queen bee/hive mind leader/rat pack leader (or whatever is appropriate) has been crushed, wounded or stunned, and the Swarm is in a weakened or confused situation. A killed swarm is actually just dispersed. When a Swarm suffers a gruesome death, all other swarm models of the same type on the table must test Morale. Other models, including swarms of a different type, do not make Morale rolls when a Swarm suffers a Gruesome Death. Note that the “two or more bases in a Swarm” condition must be met at deployment, but during the game it is possible, as Swarm bases may be dispersed/killed, that only one single Swarm base remains in play. This still counts as a Swarm. The cost shown in the profiles section is per Swarm base. A single activation roll, on one, two or three dice as usual, is rolled for the whole Swarm, even if the bases composing the Swarm are temporarily not adjacent to each other (for example, if cohesion is interrupted by terrain).;
Tailslap;3;False;When the attacked enemy recoils, roll a die: on 5 or 6 the enemy falls instead. Don't work on larger models.;The model has a vicious tail attack that can knock enemies down. Every time an enemy recoils from a model with the Tailslap special rule, roll a die. On a 5 or 6, the model falls down instead of recoiling. Use this rule only if the recoiling model is the same size or smaller than the model with Tailslap (i.e., a lizard-man cannot tailslap a Dragon, but a Dragon may tailslap a lizardman).;
Terror;15;X;Enemy in contact must make a Morale test (on only one die if the enemy wants to contact the Terror source).;Some models exude Terror. Any model wishing to enter melee with a Terror-inspiring foe must pass a Quality roll on a die. Heroes are assumed to automatically pass this test, just like any other Quality test performed on a single die. If the roll fails, the model may perform another action of the player’s choice but it may not move in contact with the terrorizing model. In other words, the action is NOT wasted, but the model lacks sufficient courage or resolve to enter melee with the terrorizing creature. When a Terror-inspiring model charges (i.e., in the moment the player declares the intention to move in melee contact, having at least one available action and enough movement allowance to do so), the charged model must immediately make a Morale check. The check is performed BEFORE the Terror-inspiring model is actually moved. This is a standard Morale check, following the standard rules and outcomes for Morale. If because of this the initial target of the charge is not available anymore (either because he moved out of range or off the table, or was killed), and there is another target in range of the Terror-inspiring model’s charge, the Terror-inspiring model may change his target and charge another. This may cause a “domino effect” where a single creature with Terror causes a whole group of opponents to panic! If a model makes the roll to resist Terror, either when moving in contact with a Terror-inspiring enemy or when charged by one it becomes immune to further Terror effects from that kind of enemy, or any other model in the game with the same profile. Models with Terror, Artificial, Fearless or Undead are immune to the effects of Terror.;
Tough;15;X;When it is killed, loose one Quality point instead. Dies if Quality reaches 7.;Tough models are hard to kill. When a Tough model receives a Gruesome Death, it is treated as a normal kill -- the model dies but there is no Morale effect. When it receives a normal kill result, the model is just wounded -- the model is not removed but its Quality target roll goes up by one. For example, when a Dragon with Quality 3+ is killed, it stays alive and becomes a Quality 4+ model. When Quality becomes 7+, the model dies. As reminders of a model’s wounds, you can use wound markers shaped like drops of blood or red plastic rings that you can put on the model. Note that a Tough model does not fall when he is doubled by the opponent. When a Tough model is already fallen and receives the killing blow, his quality goes up by 1 but he STAYS down: he still has to spend one action to stand up when his turn comes. If enemies gang up on the fallen tough character, they can keep beating him and reduce his Quality more than once in the same turn. When a Tough model flees due to a failed morale test and moves into the intercept area of an active opponent (that is, 1 x Short distance from any active opponent), the model is not killed, but takes one wound as explained above. The model’s movement stops and the enemy that caused the wound is moved in melee contact with him. Note that this is optional: the intercepting model may decide it is better to let flee the Tough model. If this happens, the intercepting model is NOT moved in contact and the fleeing Tough model does NOT take a wound. Tough models heal any Quality loss between scenarios.;
Undead;3;False;Immune to Poison & Terror & moral tests from Gruesome Deaths. Enemies have -2 on range attacks. +2 in Morale but destroyed if 2 or more failures.;Undead models are immune to Poison and Terror and do not make Morale rolls for Gruesome Deaths. Shooting attacks against Undead models are at -2, either because they are skeletal, and arrows fly through their bones, or because they don’t have vital organs that missiles can pierce. Spells used as ranged attacks affect them normally. Undead never flee from a combat. They have +2 on all Morale rolls but crumble to dust if they roll two or three failures on a Morale roll. However, if they have a friendly Standard on the table when they fail a Morale roll, Undead do not crumble to dust – they may make fleeing movements towards the Standard or remain where they are, as the player sees fit. If the Standard is destroyed (not just taken by an opponent -- to destroy it, the opponent must state that he is doing so, and one action must be spent to destroy it by a model adjacent to the Standard), all Undead models must make a Morale roll or be destroyed. If the Standard bearer moves off the table, the Undead must not make a Morale roll -- just use the normal rules.;
Unerring Aim;3;False;Halves the range modifiers.;A model with this ability halves range modifiers in ranged combat, so -2 becomes -1 and -4 becomes -2. Only models with the Shooter special ability (or armed with a ranged weapon described in the supplements) may take the Unerring Aim special rule.;